add first draft for PiU paper (#21)
elisa-tech/wg-osep: Proven-In-Use-Argument.md

The Linux operating system is not an item. Therefore, it makes no sense to say Linux or any software is safe. Linux is a general-purpose operating system, it is not designed for any specific purpose. To meet some requirements of a specific application, Linux can be customized and configured both at compile time and at runtime.

As a component of a specific safety function, the instance of Linux that is individually configured and optimized for that use case must be functionally safe so that the safety function can reduce the danger posed by an item to an acceptable level. As a rule, specific real-time requirements are placed on the operating system for safety functions, among other things. For the mass of business-critical applications, for which Linux has proven itself so well in the past decades, such requirements are not made. This consideration alone gives a first indication that an analogy of applicability from mission-critical to safety-critical applications is not so simple.

> As a component of a safety function, Linux becomes part of the safety architecture of a particular item. For the risk analysis of the item, the risk that the safety function does not intervene in time, does not intervene at all or intervenes incorrectly in some way must then also be systematically analyzed and evaluated for each safety function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a component of a safety function, Linux becomes part of the safety architecture of a particular item. For the risk analysis of the item, the risk that a component of the OS that is involved in implementing the safety function does not fulfil its responsibility (e.g. does not intervene in time, or does not intervene at all or intervenes incorrectly in some way) must then also be systematically analyzed and evaluated for each safety function.
```

Compared to nuclear power plants or chemical plants, for example, unit numbers for safety systems in the automotive industry are comparatively high. In addition, the automobile manufacturers have a comprehensive and reliable database for their vehicles with fixed inspection intervals via the contract workshops, on which a mathematical proof of operational reliability can be provided. Therefore, it is not completely impossible for the automotive industry to provide this proof. However, this requires field data to be collected and evaluated over several years.

> 
> > ToDo: Insert details about the PiU procedure in the automotive industry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I don't believe that additional material would add anything here.

For open source software in general and Linux in particular, there is a database in the respective bug tracking systems, which can partly be seen as analogous to the workshop data of the automobile manufacturers. From these sources, however, the number of bug-free running systems and their uptime cannot be determined. Nor do they systematically record the details of the overall configuration of each individual system. However, all of these data are needed for the statistical analysis of functional safety.

In order to underpin the advantages of Linux with the large open source communities for a proof of operational reliability in the context of functional safety with the necessary field data, a sufficiently large number of users would have to be prepared to regularly supply "inspection data" of their Linux servers to an analysis system, for example at the Linux Foundation. On the basis of such data, it could then be possible in principle to provide the proven in use argument for certain components and subsystems of the Linux operating system.

> Because Linux cannot be certified generally but always only for a concrete set of defined safety functions in each case, it is meaningful and necessary to conduct a proven in use argument for the configuration (compile and runtime) corresponding in each case to the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because Linux cannot be certified generally but always only for a concrete set of defined safety functions in each case, it is meaningful and necessary to conduct a proven in use argument for the configuration (compile and runtime) corresponding in each case to the application. Thus, in order to use this kind of data to support a safety case, the data would need to have been collected for a sufficiently well-defined deployment and configuration of Linux in an relevant context (e.g. as part of vehicle component, for an automotive safety case), with a comparable role with respect to the functional safety of that item.
```

> It is clear from the explanations so far that a PiU argument is already associated with a great deal of effort for application within a domain. However, the final exclusion criterion for the use of PiU comes from the practice of approval procedures. PiU is generally viewed very skeptically in the safety community. ISO 26262 Part 8 Clause 14 is not an option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is clear from the explanations so far that a PiU argument is already associated with a great deal of effort for application within a domain. However, the final exclusion criterion for the use of PiU comes from the practice of approval procedures. PiU is generally viewed very skeptically in the safety community. ISO 26262 Part 8 Clause 14, which details how a PiU argument may be applied, makes it clear that this is not an option for Linux, because it only applies to a "type of product whose definition and conditions of use are identical to or have a very high degree of commonality with a product that is already released and in operation". 
```

For the automotive sector, software developed outside of a safety context can be qualified in accordance with ISO 26262 Part 8 Clause 12. Outside this domain, there is no provision for cross-domain qualification. The continuous repair of vulnerabilities and errors, which is a matter of course for Linux, is also unthinkable within the established certification practice.

> The specific approaches to certifying Linux for the automotive sector do not use the PiU argument. Whether future changes in the standard texts and in certification practice will make a provenance argument and the transfer of safetey elements from one domain to another possible is the subject of science fiction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The specific approaches to certifying Linux for the automotive sector cannot be based on a PiU argument. Whether future changes in the standard texts and in certification practice will make a provenance argument and the transfer of safety elements from one domain to another possible is the subject of science fiction.
```

# Is Linux mature and proven enough for use in safety-critical applications?

> Linux has proven itself thousands, probably millions of times over in business-critical applications. So it makes sense to use Linux for safety-critical applications as well. Linux has many advantages 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Linux has proven itself thousands, probably millions of times over in business-critical applications, so it may seem logical that we could use it for safety-critical applications as well. Linux has many advantages 
```

> Linux has proven itself thousands, probably millions of times over in business-critical applications. So it makes sense to use Linux for safety-critical applications as well. Linux has many advantages 

Reviewer 2: There are several misconceptions already at the beginning:

1. "Linux", as intended in the document, doesn't exist. There are a large number of versions and revisions, each with own set of features and bugs.
2. When making claims of proven in use, one MUST refer to a specific SW configuration, its features and its bugs.
3. When making claims about proven in use, one MUST refer to a specific HW configuration.

There would be even the aspect of the toolchain, but the previous points are already sufficient to void the rest of the claims.

As I already stated, these sort of statements are not per se comepltely wrong, but they do nto belong to "Proven in Use", they rather fit in the PAS 8926 https://www.iso.org/standard/83346.html approach.

Author: I still do not accept to give up the option of PiU alltogether. Can you agree with the following text? Would this make the problem sufficiently clear and still provide a constructive path for the argument?

"""
It is obvious and must nevertheless be clearly repeated: Linux can never be approved 'as a whole' and 'in general' for use in safety-critical applications. There are any number of examples of Linux configurations and constellations in which the operating system fails mercilessly. Therefore, according to the conservative interpretation of the standard documents, only individual, fully specified systems can prove themselves. In this sense, every Linux system is unique and a PiU argument is categorically ruled out. 

In order to approach the PiU argumentation for Linux, the dimension of the system under consideration or the elements under consideration must be reduced and focused on the one hand. On the other hand, value ranges for configuration and constellation must be described that are recognized as equivalent with regard to the safety-critical application. If it is possible to document the elements in focus in running systems with their behavior, especially in the event of system errors and in extreme situations, and to document robust behavior, a PiU argumentation could be based on this.
"""

Reviewer 2: In my opinion, the initial problem lies in the wording "Proven in Use" - it is already widely asociated to certain concepts which do not match what you are after. I do not understand why you seem unmovable on this.
Of course you can arbitrarily redefine words and expressions, to mean what you wish them to mean.
However, it seems an unnecessary uphill battle.

Then, there are a bunch of further considerations on several assumptions that you seem to make, like what is the "installed base" that can be taken as reference, what is the accept/reject criteria.

For example: a handheld console, a water plant management system, a server,  a drone, can all run linux.
How do you define which ones can be taken as reference and which cannot?
Assuming that you have defined such a set, which changes can one make and still keep the claims valid and which would void the claims.

To me, this whole argumentation looks very verbose, but it lacks the clarity of scope that I would expect when making such claims.

It is a fact that - usually - one will want to take something as baseline and alter it.

This whole thing is missing clear criteria for what is admissible, what is not, and what is admissible, but introduces extra validation (for example).

I'd rather see a set of conicise bullet points with ok/nok do/don't and so on.

* it runs on an enormously wide range of hardware
* there are a large number of established vendors and service providers for the operating system and for additional (standard) software
* many specialists are familiar with it
* it is continuously being developed
* a large part of the innovation in IT is created on Linux and as open source software
* ...

Linux has obviously proven itself. So what is so difficult about safety-critical applications?

> First, it's useful to look briefly at what functional safety is actually about. At its core, it is about dangerous items: technical systems, devices, machines, vehicles and the like. Such items can harm the environment or people, and in the worst case can even kill people uninvolved in their operation.

Reviewer: I think we should consider using 'product' or 'products' instead of 'item' or 'items' in this and other sentences. The word 'item' has a specific meaning in ISO 26262, which may cause readers to think that we are using the word in that sense in some circumstances. 

I would also make the following change:

```suggestion
First, it's useful to look briefly at what functional safety is actually about. At its core, it is about potentially dangerous items: technical systems, devices, machines, vehicles and the like, which can harm the environment or people, and in the worst case can even kill people uninvolved in their operation.
```

Author: I see the problem with the term item although it does intentionally lead into the direction of its use in ISO 26262. Product appears to soft for me. What do you think about thing?

Reviewer: Upon further consideration, I'm happy with item

For obvious reasons, the dangers posed by an item must be reduced to an acceptable level before the item is put into operation or placed on the market. 
Thus, to reduce the unavoidable risks from an item to an acceptable level, appropriate safeguards must be found and implemented at the design stage. These protective measures come into action under certain conditions and regulate the item in such a way that a previously identified and determined risk remains below a predetermined threshold. These protective measures are called safety functions. In certain situations, a safety function can put the item in a state recognized as safe, for example, by shutting the item down.

> With the introduction of safety functions, the risk posed by an item now depends on the correct operation of that protective measure. Thus, the item is safe only to the extent that the safety function operates correctly and reliably. This is the safety of the safety function, or simply functional safety.

Author: This formulation is perhaps a little abbreviated, but I'm actually quite proud of it. Do you think it's wrong?

In Wikipedia I find the following for [functional safety](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_safety)

`Functional safety is the part of the overall safety of a system or piece of equipment that depends on automatic protection operating correctly in response to its inputs or failure in a predictable manner (fail-safe).`

Somewhat abbreviated that means:

`Functional safety is the part of the overall safety of a system that depends on automatic protection operating correctly in a predictable manner.`

The automatic protection implemented in software is the safety function, this leads to safety of the safety function. Can you go along with that?

It is obvious to implement safety functions at least partially with electronic or programmable components. It is only in this context that the question of using Linux for safety-critical applications arises: as an operating system for a programmable component in one or more safety functions.

> The Linux operating system is not an item. Therefore, it makes no sense to say Linux or any software is safe. Linux is a general-purpose operating system, it is not designed for any specific use case. For special use cases, Linux can be customized and configured both at compile time and at runtime.

Reviewer 2: I'd argue that nothing here is very obvious, since the discussion on htese topics has been going on for years.
If you want to make statements, provide backing evidence.

> As a component of a specific safety function, the instance of Linux that is individually configured and optimized for that use case must be functionally safe so that the safety function can reduce the danger posed by an item to an acceptable level. As a rule, specific real-time requirements are placed on the operating system for safety functions, among other things. For the mass of business-critical applications, for which Linux has proven itself so well in the past decades, such requirements are not made. This consideration alone gives a first indication that an analogy of applicability from mission-critical to safety-critical applications is not so simple.

Reviewer: @bulwahn What would address your concerns here? Should we omit the reference to real-time requirements, for example? Could you suggest a rewording?

> As a component of a safety function, Linux becomes part of the safety architecture of a particular item. For the risk analysis of the item, the risk that the safety function does not intervene in time, does not intervene at all or intervenes incorrectly in some way must then also be systematically analyzed and evaluated for each safety function.

Reviewer: I will try to clarify this sentence

> As a component of a safety function, Linux becomes part of the safety architecture of a particular item. For the risk analysis of the item, the risk that the safety function does not intervene in time, does not intervene at all or intervenes incorrectly in some way must then also be systematically analyzed and evaluated for each safety function.

Reviewer: See https://github.com/elisa-tech/wg-osep/pull/21/files#r1419077886
